# Assignment 4: Environments and Interpreters
This week's assignment only has one question and it builds on top of last assignment 3

### Assignment
Place your code for interpreter in a file named a4.rkt and submit it to Canvas.

You must define set of environment helpers: that uses data-structural representation of environments. Call the representation-independent version with data-structural helpers value-of-ds. Your data structures should be the association list representation.

Association list environments are a list of variable-value list of two members like ```'( (a 1) (b 2) (c 3))```. This means that the variable a has the value 1, the variable b has the value 2 and the variable c has the value 3. You add new variable-value list by cons-ing them to the left of the old environment. For example, if a new b variable is defined, then the env would look like this ```'( (b 5) (a 1) (b 2) (c 3))```. Notice that the new b on the left shadows the old b with the value 2.

Also make your closures representation independent using tagged list data structure. You should write two closure helper functions for this interpreter. Write apply-closure-ds and make-closure-ds for value-of-ds.
```racket
(define value-of-ds ...)
(define empty-env-ds ...)
(define extend-env-ds ...)
(define apply-env-ds ...)
(define make-closure-ds ...)
(define apply-closure-ds ...)
```
Your interpreter must handle the following forms: numbers, booleans, variables, lambda-abstraction, application, zero?, sub1, *, if, and let. For this part you can use the value-of interpreter from assignment-3

Remember, your solutions should be compositional.
```racket
> (value-of-ds
   '((lambda (x) (if (zero? x)
                     #t
                     #f))
     0)
   (empty-env-ds))
#t                  
> (value-of-ds
   '((lambda (x) (if (zero? x) 
                     12 
                     47)) 
     0) 
   (empty-env-ds))
12    
> (value-of-ds
   '(let ([y (* 3 4)])
      ((lambda (x) (* x y)) (sub1 6)))
   (empty-env-ds))
60
> (value-of-ds
   '(let ([x (* 2 3)])
      (let ([y (sub1 x)])
        (* x y)))
   (empty-env-ds))
30
> (value-of-ds
   '(let ([x (* 2 3)])
      (let ([x (sub1 x)])
        (* x x)))
   (empty-env-ds))
25
> (value-of-ds
   '(((lambda (f)
        (lambda (n) (if (zero? n) 1 (* n ((f f) (sub1 n))))))
      (lambda (f)
        (lambda (n) (if (zero? n) 1 (* n ((f f) (sub1 n)))))))
     5)
   (empty-env-ds))
120
```